hey this is presto Walker in a previous
video I explained a trick to solve the
following problem
imagine you have X to the power of X to
the power of X to the power of X and so
on repeated infinitely many times and
you want all of that to be equal to 2
how can you solve this problem now by
solve I meant how would you find an
answer in a high school math competition
as fast as possible I was asked this
problem in a high school math
competition and the first person to get
the answer got the points nearly
everyone loved this 1 minute video which
never claimed to be a rigorous proof
presented in a graduate level real
analysis course so what was the trick
you could look at this equation and
there's a pattern consider all of the
exponents above the base you have X to
the power of X to the power of X and so
on repeated infinitely many times now
all of that is equal to 2 therefore we
can substitute 2 for the exponent of
this base of X so we then have X to the
power of 2 is equal to 2 now we're
looking for a positive root so we get X
is equal to the square root of 2 and
that is correct that's square root of 2
to the power square root of 2 to the
power square root of 2 repeated
infinitely many times is equal to 2 now
some of the people who watch this video
actually had some interesting follow-up
emails to me including Andrew George P
divvy ad dole EV Oliver and vineet they
tried applying the method I presented to
another problem so imagine you have this
infinite Tower of exponents set equal to
4 well using the same trick as before we
would then have 4 being equal to X
raised to all these infinite
hours so we end up with X to the power
of four is equal to four now if we take
the fourth root of four and we're
looking for a positive root we end up
with X is equal to square root of 2 so
we seemingly have that square root 2
raised to the power square root of 2
infinitely many times is also equal to 4
and this raises a potential paradox so
we've shown that 4 is equal to 2 but
this is clearly absurd so where is the
mistake in this supposed proof can you
figure it out give it a try and when
you're ready keep watching the video for
an explanation so here's a short
explanation this equation or X raised to
the power of X infinitely many times is
equal to 4 this is the mistake this
equation actually has no solution so any
subsequent steps are not true it's like
starting out with the equation X plus 4
is equal to X plus 2 you could subtract
X from both sides and you would
seemingly prove that 4 is equal to 2 but
we have not really proved anything our
original equation has no solution and
similarly this original equation or we
set this infinite tower of Exponential's
equal to 4 this has no solution so
anything that we deduce from that will
not be true so for a little bit of a
longer explanation imagine we have this
infinite Tower of exponents X to the
power of X all the way infinitely many
times equal to Y this is known as
tetration or it's also sometimes
referred to as power tower super
exponentiation iterated Exponential's or
hyper power so in order to solve for X
we must first check that a solution
exists in other words you want to check
for values of x that
verge to a value for a proof I refer you
to the award-winning paper by Arthur
konoba exponentials reiterated in the
american mathematical monthly in 1981 I
provided a link in the video description
so we can plot out this function it
actually has the following curve the
minimum value is X is equal to 1 divided
by e to the power of E and that has a
value of y equals 1 over e now when X is
equal to 1 y is also equal to 1 and then
the maximum value for which this
converges is X is equal to e to the
power 1 divided by e and this gives the
maximum value of y which is e so the
range of this function goes between 1
over e and E and the domain is between 1
over e to the power of e and e to the
power of 1 over e so if you have values
outside of these ranges you're not going
to get a solution so to bring it back
for y equals 2 this is within the range
of this function so we can find a
solution X is equal to square root of 2
but for y equals 4 there is no solution
as this value exceeds the maximum value
of the infinite power tower
so this problem reminds us of a very
important point whenever you have an
infinite number of items you generally
need to check for convergence before you
simply start making substitutions and
doing usual arithmetic to solve for an
answer
thanks for watching this video please
subscribe to my channel I make videos on
math you can catch me on my blog mind
your decisions if you like this video
you can check out my books which are
listed in the video description and you
can support me on patreon if you have a
math topic you can email me pres at mind
your decisions calm